# TypeScript/ECMA

## Tools
TypeScript projects use:
- `prettier` for formatting
- `eslint` for checking code style and issues
- `tsc` for type checking and generating `d.ts` files for libraries
- `vitest` for testing
- `vite` for bundling library or app
- `typedoc` for generating documentation using `rustdoc` theme

`mono-dev` packages itself as a node module. In TypeScript/ECMAScript
projects, the package needs to be declared in `package.json` to be
managed by the package manager.

Running `pnpm up mono-dev` will resolve the latest commit and update it.

#### Template: `package.json`
-   ```json
    {
        "devDependencies": {
            "mono-dev": "github:Pistonight/mono-dev#dist"
        },
        "pistonight/mono-dev": {
            "nocheck": [
                "/src/generated"
            ]
        }
    }
    ```

    - Paths in `nocheck` will not be processed by `eslint` or `prettier`.
      If the path is in the form of `/foo` or `foo`, the `foo` directory
      will also not be type-checked.
    - `pistonight/mono-dev` is the options for mono-dev. See [MonoDevOptions](https://github.com/Pistonight/mono-dev/blob/main/src/util/types.ts)

#### Template: `Taskfile.yml`
-   ```yaml
    version: '3'

    includes:
      ecma:
        taskfile: ./node_modules/mono-dev/task/ecma.yaml
        internal: true
        optional: true
    ```

#### Template: `.gitignore`
-   ```
    # mono-dev: ecma gitignores
    node_modules
    package-lock.json
    .prettierignore
    .eslintcache
    /eslint.config.js
    /tsconfig*.json
    /mono-dev
    /dist
    /docs
    ```

## Type Checking & Linting
`mono-dev` automatically generates type checking configs based on directory structure:
- Each directory is type-checked separately
  and allow for different env config (for example, `src` vs `scripts`)
- no DOM and no types exist by default. They need to be manually included in `env.d.ts`
  in each directory. Only directories with `env.d.ts` will be checked.
- If root directory contain any TypeScript stuff, it will be checked as well
- ESLint only checks the TypeScript projects. If you use ECMAScript, you opt-out of safety anyway

```admonish note
For LSP and compatibility with other tools, ESLint and tsconfig files
will be generated at the project root (like how they are for a regular project).
For eslint-lsp, you may need to add `eslint` dependency to downstream in order
for the server to find the eslint library.
```

## Import Path remapping

We now use the NodeJS [subpath imports](https://nodejs.org/api/packages.html#subpath-imports)
to map internal imports to avoid the "relative parent import hell".
This has a few advantages over mapping it in TS:
- Generated `.d.ts` files would have the correct imports
- Bundler tools such as `vite` or `bun` doesn't need extra TS-specific configuration.

Since the bundler would remove these imports when bundling, they are only significant
in type declarations generated by TSC (since they keep the original imports).
This is why the field is mapped to the source typescript files instead of files in `dist`.

The mapping is always automatically generated for the `src` directory and 
can be manuall disabled with mono-dev option `importmap: false`.

~~~admonish example
The following directory structure:
   
```
    - src/
      - app/
      - util/
        - image/
          - index.ts
        - data/
          - index.ts
      - lib/
        - foo/
          - index.ts
        - index.ts
```

generates:

```
#lib ->  ./src/lib/index.ts
#util/image -> ./src/util/image/index.ts
#util/data -> ./src/util/data/index.ts
```

Note that in the published `package.json`, the imports will be replaced
with the `.d.ts` files

~~~



## Test
`mono-dev` re-exports `vitest` for testing. This ensures the version of `vitest`
is managed by the version of `mono-dev`. Import anything from `mono-dev/vitest`
instead of `vitest`.

Use `ecma:test` task to run test once and `ecma:test-dev` task to run in watch mode.

## Library Exports
The tooling supports 3 kinds of exports:
1. Raw: As-configured in `exports` field; anything that is not one of the below
2. Auto-compiled: Any `exports` key that satisfies `*.(c|m)?tsx?`
   - In the published package, the export is transformed to an object like below.
       ```json
       {
           "exports": {
               "./foo": "./src/bar/foo.ts"
           }
       }
       // becomes:
       {
           "exports": {
               "./foo": {
                   "import": "./dist/bar/foo.js",
                   "types": "./dist/_dts_/src/bar/foo.d.ts"
               }
           }
       }
       ```
       ```admonish info
       In this configuration,
       only the published package contains ESM + Type Declaration. Internal consumers
       (like other packages in a monorepo) **consume the TS source directly**
       for more streamlined dev experience. For example running vite dev server will not
       require internal packages to be built into ESM first. Editing TS source
       also does not require rebuilding the packages
       ```
   - Use the mono-dev `nocompile` option to exclude auto-configured compilation,
     which means the published package will also export the TS file directly.
3. Manual-compiled: Object `exports` key of the form:
   ```json
   {
       "pistonight/mono-dev": {
           "compile": {
               "./foo": "./src/bar/foo.ts"
           }
       },
       "exports": {
           "./foo": {
               "import": "./dist/bar/foo.js",
               "types": "./dist/_dts_/src/bar/foo.d.ts"
           }
       }
   }
   ```
   ```admonish warning
   the `compile` option must be specified to enable this.
   ```
   ```admonish info
   This configuration is useful if the compiled ESM of the package needs to be consumed
   as-is from within the monorepo. For example when testing bundling the package (importing
   transpiled ESM vs. TS directly would not produce the same output)
   ```

Note that `src` must be where TS files are exported from, and `dist` must be where
output ESM is emitted. These 2 directory names are NOT configurable.

## Build Library
Building library from TS source into consumable package without TS supports zero-config.
Under the hood, the library mode of `vite` is used. `vite.config.ts` will be generated
on-the-go when running the `ecma:lib-build` task.

Currently the library is only packaged as ESM.

The build uses `dependencies`, `devDependencies` and `peerDependencies` to automatically
externalize dependencies.

- `dependencies`
  - Will be installed by package manager when consumer adds the library
  - **Externalized**: The code of the dependency will not be in the library
- `peerDependencies`:
  - Will NOT be installed by package manager when consumer adds the library;
    They have to also install it in the downstream.
  - **Externalized**: The code of the dependency will not be in the library
- `devDependencies`:
  - Will NOT be installed by package manager when consumer adds the library.
  - **NOT Externalized**: The code of the dependency is bundled into the library.

Consideration: Unless the library is meant to be used as a framework, DO NOT add global states.
It's very easy to cause duplicated global states when resolving dependencies.

See the above section for out library exports are configured.

If needed, the `lib-types` export defines the types for library builds.
Put in `env.d.ts`
```typescript
/// <reference types="mono-dev/lib-types" />
```


## Vite
`mono-dev` ships a baseline vite config that adds common plugins
and configs to my projects.

`vite.config.ts` at the root:
```typescript
import { configure } from "mono-dev/app-build-config";

// config options are referenced from pistonight/mono-dev options
// in package.json

// use configure just like defineConfig
export default configure({
    /** normal vite config here */
});
```

Plugins are automatically added:
- YAML loader (always added)
- React and React Compiler (if react is installed)
- WASM (if configured)

Define vite types in `src/env.d.ts`:
```typescript
/// <reference types="mono-dev/app-types" />
/// <reference types="dom" />
```

Use the `ecma:app-dev` and `ecma:app-build` tasks to execute vite
dev server and build.

## Publish
The tool need to zap the `package.json` before publishing.
Therefore, `private` must be `true` to prevent accidental
publishing of the original package.json.
Use the `ecma:publish` or `pnpm exec mono publish` to publish the package.

`--access public` is always specified.
